# Exercise: Types and Classes

## Exercise 1.
What are the types of the following values?

* `['a','b','c']` → `[Char]`
* `('a','b','c')` → `(Char, Char, Char)`
* `[(False,'O'),(True,'1')]` → `[(Bool, Int)]`
* `[(False,True),('0','1')]` →  ERROR!
* `([False,True],['0','1'])` → `([Bool], [Char])`
* `[tail, init, reverse]` → `[[a] -> [a]]`

## Exercise 2
Write down definitions that have the following types; it does not matter what the definitions actually do as long as they are type correct.

* `bools :: [Bool]` → `bools = [True, False]`
* `nums :: [[Int]]` → `nums = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 1], [12]]`
* `add :: Int -> Int -> Int -> Int` → `add x y z = x+y+z`
* `copy :: a -> (a,a)` → `copy t = (t, t)`
* `apply :: (a -> b) -> a -> b` → `apply fn x = fn x`

## Exercise 3.
What are the types of the following functions?

* `second xs = head (tail xs)` → `second :: [t] -> t`
* `swap (x,y) = (y,x)` → `swap :: (x, y) -> (y, x)`
* `pair x y = (x,y)` → `pair :: x -> y -> (x, y)`
* `double x = x*2` → `double :: Num t => t -> t`
* `palindrome xs = reverse xs == xs` → `palindrome :: Eq a => [a] -> Bool`
* `twice f x = f (f x)` → `twice :: (t -> t) -> t -> t`

Hint: take care to include the necessary class constraints in the types if the
functions are defined using overloaded operator

## Exercise 4.
Check your answers to the preceding three questions using GHCi.

## Exercise 5.

Why is it not feasible in general for function types to be instances of the Eq class?

-> There is no *normal form* which allows a comparison two functions since a particular porblem can be solved in very much different ways. Therefore, the comparison of two function types is not decidable.

When is it feasible?

-> If the number of possible inputs is finite - then, it's possible to try them all and compare it.

Hint: two functions of the same type are equal if they always return equal results for equal arguments.

# Exercise: Defining Functions
## Exercise 1.

Using library functions, define a function `halve :: [a] -> ([a],[a])` that splits an even-lengthed list into two halves. For example:

```haskell
> halve [1,2,3,4,5,6]
([1,2,3],[4,5,6])
```

```haskell
halve :: [a] -> ([a],[a])
halve k = (take n k, drop n k)
            where n = length k `div` 2
```

## Exercise 2.
Define a function `third :: [a] -> a` that  returns  the  third  element  in  a list that contains at least this many elements using:

* `head` and `tail`

```haskell
third xs = head(tail(tail(xs)))
```

* list indexing `!!`

```haskell
third xs = xs !! 3
```

* pattern matching
```haskell
third (_ : (_ : (x : _))) = x
```

## Exercise 3.
Consider a function `safetail :: [a] -> [a]` that behaves in the same way as `tail` except that it maps the empty list to itself rather than producing an error. Using `tail` and the function `null :: [a] -> Bool` that decides if a list is empty or not, defined `safetail` using:

* a conditional expression

```haskell
safetail xs = if xs == [] then [] else tail xs
-- or
safetail xs = if null xs then [] else tail xs
```

* guarded equations

```haskell
safetail xs | null xs   = []
            | otherwise = tail xs
```

* pattern matching

```haskell
safetail [] = []
safetail xs = tail xs
-- or
safetail [] = []
safetail (_, xs) = xs
```

## Exercise 4.
In a similar way to `&&`, show how the disjunction operator `||` can be defined in four different ways using pattern matching.

```haskell
True || True = True
True || False = True
False || True = True
False || False = False
```

# Exercise 5.
Without using any other library functions or operators, show how the meaning  of  the  following  pattern  matching  definition  for  logical  conjunction `&&` can be formalised using conditional expressions:

```haskell
True && True = True
_    && _    = False
```

!!! todo

    Solve this

Hint: use two nested conditional expressions.

## Exercise 6.

Do the same for the following alternative definition, and note the difference in the number of conditional expressions that are required:

```haskell
True  && b = b
False && _ = False
```

!!! todo

    Solve this


## Exercise 7.
Show  how  the  meaning  of  the  following  curried  function  definition  can  be formalised in terms of lambda expressions:

```haskell
mult :: Int -> Int -> Int -> Int
mult x y z = x*y*z
mult = (\x -> \y -> \z -> x*y*z)

```

## Exercise 8.
The Luhn algorithm is used to check bank credit card numbers for simple
errors such as mistyping a digit, and proceeds as follows:

* consider each digit as a separate number
* moving left, double every other number from the second last
* subtract 9 from each number that is now greater than 9
* add all the resulting numbers together

if the total is divisible by 10, the card number is valid. Define a function `luhnDouble :: Int -> Int` that doubles a digit and subtracts 9 if the result is greater than 9.

For example:
```haskell
> luhnDouble 3
6
> luhnDouble 6
3
```


!!! todo

    Solve this

Using `luhnDouble` and the integer remainder function `mod`, define a function `luhn :: Int -> Int -> Int -> Int -> Bool` that decides if a four-digit bank card number is valid.

For example:
```haskell
> luhn 1 7 8 4
True
> luhn 4 7 8 3
False
```


!!! todo

    Solve this


# Exercise: List Comprehensions

## Exercise 1.
Using a list comprehension, give an expression that calculates the sum $$1^2+2^2+ ... + 100^2$$
of the first one hundred integer squares.

```haskell
[x^2 | x <- [1..100]]
```

## Exercise 2.
Suppose that a coordinate grid of size `m x n` is given by the list of all pairs `(x, y)` of integers such that $$0 \le x \le m$$ and $$0 \le y \le n$$. Using a list comprehension,  define  a  function `grid :: Int -> Int -> [(Int,Int)]` that returns a coordinate grid of a given size.

For example:

```haskell
> grid 1 2
[(0,0),(0,1),(0,2),(1,0),(1,1),(1,2)]
```

```haskell
grid m n = [(x, y) | x<- [0..m], y<- [0..n]]
```

## Exercise 3.
Using a list comprehension and the function grid above, define a function `square :: Int -> [(Int,Int)]` that returns a coordinate square of size n, excluding the diagonal from `(0, 0)` to `(n, n)`.

For example:

```haskell
> square 2
[(0,1),(0,2),(1,0),(1,2),(2,0),(2,1)]
```

```haskell
-- without using grid
square n = [(x, y) | x<- [0..n], y<- [0..n], x /= y]
-- with grid
squre n = [(x, y) | (x, y) <- grid n n, x /= y]
```

## Exercise 4.

In a similar way to the function length, show how the library function `replicate :: Int -> a -> [a]` that produces a list of identical elements can be defined using a list comprehension. For example:

```haskell
> replicate 3 True
[True,True,True]
```

```haskell
replicate t v = [v | _<-[0..t]]
```

## Exercise 5.
A triple (x, y, z) of positive integers is Pythagorean if it satisfies the equation $$x^2 + y^2 = z^2$$. Using a list comprehension with three generators, define a function `pyths :: Int -> [(Int,Int,Int)]` that returns the list of all such triples whose components are at most a given limit. For example:

```haskell
> pyths 10
[(3,4,5),(4,3,5),(6,8,10),(8,6,10)]
```

```haskell
pyths n = [(x, y, z) | x<-[1..n], y<-[1..n], z<-[1..n], x^2+y^2 == z^2]
```

## Exercise 6.
A positive integer is perfect if it equals the sum of all of its factors, excluding the number itself. Using a list comprehension and the function factors, define a function `perfects :: Int -> [Int]` that returns the list of all perfect numbers up to a given limit. For example:

```haskell
> perfects 500
[6,28,496]
```

```haskell
factors n = [x | x<-[1..n-1], n `mod` x == 0]
perfects n = [x | x<-[1..n], sum (factors x) == x]
```

## Exercise 7.
Show how the list comprehension `[(x,y) | x <- [1,2], y <- [3,4]]` with two generators can be re-expressed using two comprehensions with single generators. Hint: nest one comprehension within the other and make use of the library function `concat :: [[a]] -> [a]`.

```haskell
concat [[(1, x) | x<-[3, 4]] , [(2, x) | x<-[3, 4]]]
```

## Exercise 8.
Redefine the function positions using the function find.

```haskell
find p xs = [x | x<-xs, p x]
```

## Exercise 9.
The scalar product of two lists of integers xs and ys of length n is given by the sum of the products of corresponding integers:

In a similar manner to chisqr, show how a list comprehension can be used to define a function `scalarproduct :: [Int] -> [Int] -> Int` that returns the scalar product of two lists. For example:

```haskell
> scalarproduct [1,2,3] [4,5,6]
32
```

```haskell
scalarproduct xs ys =  sum [x*ys !! i | (x, i) <- zip xs [0..]]
```

## Exercise 10.
Modify the Caesar cipher program to also handle upper-case letters.

# Exercise: Recursion

## Exercise 1.
How does the recursive version of the factorial function behave if applied to a negative argument, such as (-1)? Modify the definition to prohibit negative arguments by adding a guard to the recursive case.

The recursion would never terminate → Stack Overflow.

```haskell
fac :: Int -> Int
fac 0 = 1
fac n | n > 0 = n * fac (n-1)
```

## Exercise 2.
Define a recursive function `sumdown :: Int -> Int` that returns the sum of the non-negative integers from a given value down to zero. For example, `sumdown 3` should return the result $$3+2+1+0 = 6.$$

```haskell
sumdown :: Int -> Int
sumdown n | n > 0 = n + sumdown (n-1)
          | n == 0 = 0
```

## Exercise 3.
Define the exponentiation operator ^ for non-negative integers using the same pattern of recursion as the multiplication operator *, and show how the expression 2 ^ 3 is evaluated using your definition.

```haskell
-- Ambiguous occurrence ‘^’
(^) :: Int -> Int -> Int
m ^ 0 = 1
m ^ n = m * (m ^ (n-1))

pow :: Int -> Int -> Int
pow m 0 = 1
pow m n = m * pow m (n-1)


2 ^ 3
={ applying ^ }
2 * (2 ^ 2)
={ applying ^ }
2 * (2 * (2 ^ 1))
={ applying ^ }
2 * (2 * (2 * ( 2 ^ 0)))
={ applying ^ }
2 * (2 * (2 * ( 1)))
={ applying * }
8
```

## Exercise 4.
Define a recursive function `euclid :: Int -> Int -> Int` that implements Euclid’s algorithm for calculating the greatest common divisor of two non-negative integers: if the two numbers are equal, this number is the result; otherwise, the smaller number is subtracted from the larger, and the same process is then repeated. For example:

```haskell
> euclid 6 27
> 3
```

```haskell
euclid :: Int -> Int -> Int
euclid x y | x == y     = x
           | x > y      = euclid (x-y) y
           | otherwise  = euclid x (y-x)
```

## Exercise 5.
Using the recursive definitions given in this chapter, show how `length [1,2,3]`, `drop 3 [1,2,3,4,5]`, and `init [1,2,3]` are evaluated.


```haskell
length :: [a] -> Int
length []= 0
length (_:xs) = 1 + length xs


length [1,2,3]
= { applying length }
1 + length [2,3]
= { applying length }
1 + (1 + length [3])
= { applying length }
1 + (1 + (1 + length []))
= { applying length }
1 + (1 + (1 + 0))
= { applying + }
3

drop :: Int -> [a] -> []
drop 0 xs = xs
drop _ [] = []
drop n (_:xs) = drop (n-1) xs

drop 3 [1,2,3,4,5]
= { applying drop }
drop 2 [2,3,4,5]
= { applying drop }
drop 1 [3,4,5]
= { applying drop }
drop 0 [4,5]
= { applying drop }
[4,5]

init :: [a] -> [a]
init [_] = []
init (x:xs) = x : init xs

init [1,2,3]
{ applying init }
1 : (init [2,3])
{ applying init }
1 : (2 : (init [3]))
{ applying init }
1 : (2 : ([]))
{ list notation }
[1,2]
```

## Exercise 6.
Without looking at the definitions from the standard prelude, define the following library functions on lists using recursion.

1. Decide if all logical values in a list are True:

    ```haskell
    and :: [Bool] -> Bool
    and [] = True
    and (x:xs) = x && (and xs)
    ```

2 .Concatenate a list of lists:

    ```haskell
    concat :: [[a]] -> [a]
    concat [] = []
    concat (x:xs) = x ++ concat xs
    ```

3. Produce a list with n identical elements:

    ```haskell
    replicate :: Int -> a -> [a]
    replicate 0 _ = []
    replicate n v = v : replicate (n-1) v
    ```

4. Select the nth element of a list:

    ```haskell
    (!!) :: [a] -> Int -> a
    (x:xs) !! 0 = x
    (_:xs) !! n = xs !! (n-1)
    ```

5. Decide if a value is an element of a list:

    ```haskell
    elem :: Eq a => a -> [a] -> Bool
    elm y [] = False
    elm y (x:xs) | x == y = True
                 | otherwise = elm y xs
    ```

Note: most of these functions are defined in the prelude using other library functions rather than using explicit recursion, and are generic functions rather than being specific to the type of lists.

## Exercise 7.
Define a recursive function `merge :: Ord a => [a] -> [a] -> [a]` that merges two sorted lists to give a single sorted list. For example:

```haskell
> merge [2,5,6] [1,3,4]
[1,2,3,4,5,6]

merge :: Ord a => [a] -> [a] -> [a]
merge [] ys = ys
merge xs [] = xs
merge (x:xs) (y:ys) = if x < y then
                        x : merge xs (y:ys)
                      else
                        y : merge (x:xs) ys
```

Note: your definition should not use other functions on sorted lists such as insert or isort, but should be defined using explicit recursion.

## Exercise 8.
Using merge, define a function `msort :: Ord a => [a] -> [a]` that implements merge sort, in which the empty list and singleton lists are already sorted, and any other list is sorted by merging together the two lists that result from sorting the two halves of the list separately.

Hint: first define a function `halve :: [a] -> ([a],[a])` that splits a list into two halves whose lengths differ by at most one.

```haskell

```
## Exercise 9.
Using the five-step process, construct the library functions that:

1. calculate the sum of a list of numbers;
2. take a given number of elements from the start of a list;
3. select the last element of a non-empty list.
